Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this lecture we are going to learn about using our control bones that we've placed there and actually
using an inverse charismatic constraints so that we can move around our model.
The reason why we want to do this is because if we have a look at the bone itself and open up our properties
panel looking at the item you'll see that location is grayed out.
In fact everything to do with our lamp.
Apart from this one at the very bottom here everything is grayed out which basically means we cannot
keep frame in and we'll learn about that very shortly.
The position of this bone we cannot just move it around and expect it to work.
But what we can do is get it to follow a new bone this control bone that we've made by adding constraints
to it.
Let's go find out more okay everybody welcome back.
So let's go ahead and start setting up our constraints.
The first thing we need to understand is why are we setting up these constraints.
Well as I alluded to in the introduction these bones themselves all of these have no way of adjusting
the transform apart from the one at the bottom.
Who is the parents of all of this now that is a problem because when it comes to key framing these bones
and their location it just won't work.
You'll end up with it snapping back and not being able to set its position.
And that will just ruin our animation.
You'll basically make the animation impossible.
But what we can do is link it together and use this control bone to control where this top bone is pointing
and because we're using inverse cinematics the rest of the bones will follow.
And that's a great deal of control that we can do with that.
First of all in order to set up a constraint we used to at the moment going down that say selecting
the bone we want to constrain going down to the constraints the bone constraints specifically and then
go into add a bone constraint.
Now you can do it this way we can go down to inverse Kana Mattox set the targets as the armature as
the bone to the look bone.
And there we go.
That's how we can set this up in a very manual way.
Now I'm going to clear that off for the moment what we can also do is select tail control bone select
the bone that we want to control whilst holding down shift and then go control shift and see whilst
our cursors over the 3-D view and that same menu will pop up again.
That's really useful because now we can go straight to invest in a Mattox and we get the same result
much much quicker.
The one thing to look at in this for the moment we're not using a poll targets but you can see we've
got the target being the armature and then the look bone.
We've got iterations maximum number of solver solving iterations.
I'm going to leave as 500 at the moment with the type of animation we're doing.
We don't need to muck around or adjust that's now the chain length.
This is how many of these bones are being affected when we're controlling it with this controlled bone.
So if we go back and you notice that the bone has changed color to yellow that means it has a constraint
on it more specifically an inverse can somatic constraints it will increase the chain length.
Suddenly we're only talking about the top of the lamp moving because we're talking about one bone being
affected every increase that's two three four.
Let's do that two three four.
Now we're moving the entire thing.
Now that's pretty cool and very useful but we still do have a problem.
We'll discuss that later on because currently you can still manage to push the model through itself
but there is a problem at the moment.
If we would scrap this base control and start moving it's along it's not actually moving anything.
So we need to do some parenting not only to this bottom one but to the top one as well.
I'm going to leave that.
Your challenge and your challenge sets up the parenting.
So what we need to do here is the base control bone moves the entire lamp but we don't want that other
control bone being left behind the one that controls the looking of the lamp.
So the look controlled bone follows along as well.
Video now play with parenting and get that all working
okay everybody welcome back.
Let's hop on over into blender and sort out our parenting
Hello everybody and welcome back.
Okay.
So the first thing that I want to do is actually just get used to not resetting it at the moment.
We've gone in and we've selected all and we've cleared with either Alton R. and Alton g to make sure
that it's back at is rest pose but that's the whole point of the rest pose.
And having it.
So let's go to our armature and set it in its rest position.
There we go.
Now when we go to edit mode everything's where it needs to be.
If you don't do that you end up with this horrible mismatch when you're imposed mode and you switch
to edit mode where things reset but the model doesn't move along with it setting it to the rest position
and going backwards and forwards again.
There we go.
We'll solve that issue.
So we need some parenting now this base bone at the bottom this is the one that we're going to move
in.
Everything comes along.
So when you select this first bone and parents it's that one.
Now we have an option of connected or keep offset.
Now if you've been playing along you will notice that connected.
We don't want to do that.
Okay.
Easy enough to do it that way and cause a bit of a problem.
But again control and P once we've done control and pay we can keep the offsets.
The next thing we want to do is parent this one at the top so that base bone as well.
This is gonna be like our root bone it's going to move everything along with it.
Otherwise what will happen.
We can hop into Poe's mode now and show that is as we move along or rest position here we go as we move
along this other bone this other controlled bone gets left behind.
Now that is very useful if you want it to be stuck to a particular surface but that's not what we're
aiming for in this particular case.
So let's go ahead grab this one here and parents it to the base bone as well.
We need to be an edit mode to do that very easy to fall foul of that and we need to keep the offsets
as well.
Now what we should find is that the whole lump moves along.
Perfect.
So we've got everything set up how I think we want it set up let's go ahead and move some of these around
now.
I think that this is perhaps the wrong shape to have.
We've got a cone that's now facing completely the wrong way it's not it is not having its intended purpose
anymore.
I think we need something like a sphere.
Now we can go ahead and delete the cone and reactive and yada yada but what's going to be easy to do
is take over that mesh object and change the mesh data.
So it's no longer a cone but a sphere.
So let's search for cone.
I think I left it called cone.
I'm not sure.
Let's see if I did leave it called cone.
Unfortunately I didn't.
So this was the look Byron wasn't it.
Here we go.
Look bone shape Look that's the one we wanted.
I'm going to come out into object mode select this and into edit mode and just press access delete everything
there.
Then I can add in a U V sphere.
There we go.
And I can lower the segments here.
I want to go to eight and four I've played with this lots that's going to be about right.
And the radius needn't be that large.
Here we go point to point three point to five smack bang in the middle.
OK.
That is good I'm liking that we can see it's updated live for us.
That's the other really good thing about doing it this way.
So I can go ahead back in supposed mode now a sphere is a much better object to move around it's got
no inherent direction and it gives us a lot of control I think the final thing I think to look at here
is if we select the yellow bone and look at the chain length what we don't want is it sets too far.
So now we've got that extra bone and we've got one two three four.
And the fifth bone at the bottom is now part of this chain because it's now the parents of everything
else here if we increase that to five we start getting twisting.
Now that's interesting because that results in doing this really jerky motion so we don't really want
it doing that.
So let's go ahead and select this bone again and lower that down to four.
Now let's make sure we can move everything along as we'd expect.
There we go our laps just jumps up there and we can look around as well.
Perfect.
I'm just gonna grab this and move it out the way.
We've still got the bone shape look that.
Let's move that back.
Now this is a great example where Ultima G just places it back at the start point.
Let's turn on look there for the moment so we can have a look.
I'm going to select my bone my control bone hide or everything else from my scene pop my lamp in an
interesting or inquisitive position en route.
I'm loving this.
You know we've spent so long now modelling it and rigging it together.
Even though we're not animating it at the moment this is brilliant because we're able to move it around
and it looks like it's searching for something and this is this is key here we're starting to play with
our models and I hope yours are coming along really well.
I'm liking how this is looking I'm going to do a quick rendered view as well.
Sweets I'm really looking forward to seeing how yours are coming along.
Please show your work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.